{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf824\cocoasubrtf480
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Entering Data into Template
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
To correctly use this template data must be prepared and entered in a particular fashion. DO NOT simply type data into the template or paste from a separate file. Please follow these instructions for entering data.\
\
1.  Create a separate Excel file for your raw data with different worksheets for pre- and post-instruction data. Each student's responses should be in a different row. Column A should have student names or identifiers. FMCE responses for each student should start in column G. There should be one cell for each question response (FMCE #1 in G, FMCE #2 in H, etc.). Make sure the name/identifier for each student is the same for pre- and post-instruction.\
\
2.  COPY the rows from your raw data file, HIGHLIGHT row 17 in the desired worksheet in the template, and INSERT the copied cells. The template is designed such that all of the data must come after row 16 and before the row beginning with "HIGHLIGHT THIS ROW, INSERT" (row 17 when first opened). (See note below to explain this step.)\
\
3.  HIGHLIGHT cells from BB15-BM15 down to BB-BM for the last subject in your data set and FILL DOWN. The BB-BM cells for each of your data subjects should now be filled. The BB column returns "TRUE" if the name/identifier for that subject appears in both the pre- and post-instruction data and "FALSE" if it only appears in one set of data.\
\
4.  CLEAR the contents in cells BB16-BM16.\
\
5.  REPEAT steps 2-4 for all four input worksheets.\
\

\f0\b \ul Matching Data
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
The template does not require that you use matched data. If you would prefer to eliminate unmatched data, follow these steps:\
\
1.  Check BB column for "FALSE" values (indicating unmatched data).\
\
2.  Visually inspect the names/identifiers for unmatched subjects in both pre- and post-instruction data sets to make sure that small typos or nicknames did not cause an incorrect "FALSE" reading.\
\
3.  HIGHLIGHT rows of unmatched subjects and DELETE.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ql\qnatural

\f0\b \cf0 \ul Avoiding common errors\

\f1\b0 \ulnone Several common errors can prevent you from successfully analyzing your FMCE data. \
\
1. If you do not insert data correctly, the spreadsheet will not be able to count the prevalence of each response appropriately. The calculations use array formulas which span rows 16 to 17. When you insert data, your data is included in that array function. If you paste data instead, only rows 16 and 17 are counted. \
\
2. If you don\'d5t clear the contents of cells BB16-BM16, you count information that shouldn\'d5t be part of your data set. The calculations are designed so that empty cells are required in those cells. \
}