{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf824\cocoasubrtf480
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica;\f2\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-Oblique;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 template_fmce_2009-04-21.xlt\

\f1\b0\fs24 \
template_fmce_2009-04-21.xlt (referred to as "THE TEMPLATE") is an Excel
\fs16 \super TM
\fs24 \nosupersub  template designed to analyze responses to the Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation (FMCE) (Thornton and Sokoloff, 1998). THE TEMPLATE consists of five worksheets: two worksheets require input of pre-instruction data, two worksheets require input of post-instruction data, one worksheet automatically generates tables and plots from the data in the other four worksheets.\
\

\f0\b \ul Authors
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
Michael C. Wittmann	email:  wittmann@umit.maine.edu\
Trevor I. Smith		email:  trevor.i.smith@umit.maine.edu\
\

\f0\b \ul License
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 3.0 United States License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/us/ or send a letter to Creative Commons, 171 Second Street, Suite 300, San Francisco, California, 94105, USA.\
\
For the purposes of this document THE TEMPLATE will be considered "THE WORK" as defined by the cc by-nc-nd license. A "Derivative Work" will be defined as any template created by modifying THE TEMPLATE. A spreadsheet created by using THE TEMPLATE to enter and analyze data as described in this document is NOT considered a "Derivative Work" and is, therefore, allowed under the terms of the cc by-nc-nd license.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b \cf0 \ul \ulc0 Input Worksheets
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
Worksheets 'Pre FMCE' and 'Post FMCE' compare students' pre-instruction and post-instruction responses to the correct responses. The correct responses are listed in row 2. Row 3 in each sheet shows the percentage of students that answered each question correctly. Columns BC-BM show how correct each student's responses were for the entire survey as well as for each question cluster (defined below). These sheets also calculate the average score and standard deviation of the scores for the class as well as report the minimum and maximum correct scores.\
\
Worksheets 'Pre Common' and 'Post Common' compare students' pre-instruction and post-instruction responses to the most common incorrect responses. As with the 'Pre FMCE' and 'Post FMCE' worksheets the most common incorrect responses are listed in row 2. Row 3 in each sheet shows the percentage of students that gave the most common incorrect response for each question. Columns BC-BM show how closely each student's responses aligned with the most common incorrect responses for the entire survey as well as for each question cluster. These sheets also calculate the average score and standard deviation of the scores for the class as well as report the minimum and maximum student correspondence with the most common incorrect responses.\
\

\f0\b \ul Overview Worksheet
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
The 'OVERVIEW' worksheet uses the class average scores displayed on the 'Pre FMCE' and 'Post FMCE' worksheets to calculate the average normalized gain for the class for the entire survey as well as for each question cluster. The normalized gain (following Hake's (1998) definition) is a measure of class improvement from pre- to post-instruction. Normalized gain is defined as the ratio of the class improvement (% correct post-instruction - % correct pre-instruction) to the maximum possible improvement (100% - % correct pre-instruction). The average pre-instruction and post-instruction percentages are plotted in bar graph form for each of the question clusters as well as the entire survey.\
\
	%correct
\fs18 post
\fs24  - %correct
\fs18 pre
\fs24 \
<g> = --------------------------------------\
	         100 - %correct
\fs18 pre
\fs24 \
\
The 'OVERVIEW' worksheet also uses the class average scores displayed on the 'Pre Common' and 'Post Common' worksheets to calculate the average normalized loss for the class for the entire survey as well as for each question cluster. The normalized loss (following Dykstra's (2002) definition) is a measure of the decrease in the correlation between students responses and the most common incorrect responses from pre- to post-instruction. Normalized loss is defined as the ratio of the reduction in class use of common incorrect responses (% common incorrect post-instruction - % common incorrect pre-instruction) to the maximum possible reduction (% common incorrect pre-instruction). Just as the normalized gain can be used to gauge a class' improvement in terms of giving more correct responses, the normalized loss can be used to gauge a class' improvement in terms of not giving as many common incorrect responses. The average pre-instruction and post-instruction percentages are plotted in bar graph form for each of the question clusters as well as the entire survey for the most common incorrect responses as well.\
\
	%common
\fs18 post
\fs24  - %common
\fs18 pre
\fs24 \
<L> = -------------------------------------------\
		%common
\fs18 pre
\fs24 \
\
The 'OVERVIEW' worksheet uses the standard deviations displayed on all four input worksheets to calculate the standard error for each pair of pre- and post-instruction average scores (both correct and most common incorrect). The standard error uses the standard deviations from the pre- and post-instruction data (s
\fs18 pre
\fs24  and s
\fs18 post
\fs24 , respectively) to calculate a pooled standard deviation. The pooled standard deviation is then normalized based on the numbers of students in each of the data sets (n
\fs18 pre
\fs24  and n
\fs18 post
\fs24 ). The formula for standard error is as follows:\
\
	Sqrt[((n
\fs18 pre 
\fs24 - 1)s
\fs18 pre
\fs20 \super 2 
\fs24 \nosupersub + (n
\fs18 post 
\fs24 - 1)s
\fs18 post
\fs20 \super 2
\fs24 \nosupersub )/(n
\fs18 pre 
\fs24 + n
\fs18 post
\fs24 )]\
SE = 	-------------------------------------------------------------------\
			100*Sqrt[n
\fs18 pre
\fs20 \super -1
\fs24 \nosupersub  + n
\fs18 post
\fs20 \super -1
\fs24 \nosupersub ]\
\
Calculation of the standard error is included to facilitate statistical comparisons between different student populations. In particular, comparisons could be made in the form of bar graphs in which the normalized gain (or loss) for each population is the graphed value, and the standard error is used as the error bars for statistical comparisons.\
\

\f0\b \ul Question Clusters
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
The question clusters used in THE TEMPLATE are consistent with those defined by Smith and Wittmann (2008) and are separated by question content and presentation. The definitions of the question clusters are as follows:\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural
\cf0 \ul Cluster\ulnone 				\ul Questions\ulnone \
Force Sled				1-7\
Reversing Direction (Rev. Dir.)	8-13, 27-29\
Force Graphs			14-21\
Acceleration Graphs		22-26\
Newton's third law (Newton III)	30-39\
Velocity Graphs			40-43\
Energy				44-47\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\b \cf0 \ul Omitted Questions
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
In keeping with the recommendations of the authors of the FMCE several questions are omitted from THE TEMPLATE analysis. These questions are omitted from analysis because correct responses are often not indicative of Newtonian thinking. They are included in the survey for other purposes (e.g. to test reading comprehension), but are not intended as tests of Newtonian thinking. The omitted questions are 5, 6, 15, 33, 35, 37, and 39. For more information on these omitted questions see articles by Thornton and Sokoloff (1998) and Thornton et al. (2009).\
\

\f0\b \ul Grouping and Weighting
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
The Reversing Direction cluster consists of questions that ask students about the force acting on (or acceleration of) an object as it is tossed vertically in the air (or rolls freely up and down a ramp). THE TEMPLATE groups the questions in the Reversing Direction cluster into three sub-groups of three questions each. Each subgroup contains a question about the object as it goes up, a question when the object is at the top of its motion, and a question as the object comes back down. The authors of the FMCE propose that a student should only be considered to have correct Newtonian thinking if he gets all three questions in a given sub-group correct (Thornton and Sokoloff, 1998). The test authors have also indicated that the purpose of each sub-group is to really ask two questions: one about the object as it is moving (either up or down) and one about the apex of its motion (when velocity is zero). In this spirit THE TEMPLATE correlates students' responses for all three questions within a sub-group and assigns a score of 2 for each correct sub-group.\
\

\f0\b \ul Two "Total"s
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
After the appropriate questions have been omitted and the Reversing Direction sub-groups have been modified to yield a maximum score of 6 for the nine questions, the maximum score for the entire FMCE is 37. However, Thornton et al. (2009) suggest that the questions in the Energy cluster not be included in the total score for the FMCE as they do not strictly deal with force and motion. Smith and Wittmann (2008) take the opposite stance that the questions in the energy cluster add an important additional aspect the the FMCE. As a result of these two viewpoints, THE TEMPLATE calculates two "Total" scores for each set of students. "Total (37)" includes the Energy cluster questions, and "Total (33)" does not. THE TEMPLATE was designed in this manner to be as accessible as possible to the entire physics education community. Researchers and instructors should make their own decisions regarding the inclusion of the Energy cluster questions in the total FMCE score.\
\

\f0\b \ul Most Common Incorrect Responses
\f1\b0 \ulnone \
Smith and Wittmann (2008) report on the importance of considering students' incorrect responses as well as correct responses. Thornton (1993) and Dykstra (2002) also discuss the benefits of examining how students respond incorrectly, not just that they weren't correct. Thornton (1993) and Smith and Wittmann (2008) report the most common incorrect student responses for each of the questions on the FMCE. Questions 15, 33, and 43 appear not to have incorrect responses that are more common than others. As a result question 43 is added to the list of questions omitted from the analysis regarding most common incorrect responses, reducing the maximum score for the FMCE to 36 (or 32 without Energy).\
\
\
References:\
D. I. Dykstra, Why Teach Kinematics? An Examination of the Teaching of 	Kinematics and Force, available at: http://www.bisestate.edu/physics/dykstra/WTK1.pdf (2002)\
\
T. I. Smith and M. C. Wittmann, Applying a resources framework to analysis of the Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation, 
\f2\i Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res.
\f1\i0  
\f0\b 4
\f1\b0 , 020101 (2008)\
\
R. K. Thornton, Using Large-scale Classroom Research to Study Student Conceptual Learning in Mechanics and to Develop New Approaches to Learning, NATO Advanced Studies Institute Series (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1993)\
\
R. K. Thornton and D. R. Sokoloff, Assessing student learning of Newton's laws: The Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation and the Evaluation of Active Learning Laboratory and Lecture Curricula, 
\f2\i Am. J. Phys.
\f1\i0  
\f0\b 66
\f1\b0 , 338 (1998)\
\
R. K. Thornton, D. Kuhl, K. Cummings, and J. Marx, Comparing the force and motion conceptual evaluation and the force concept inventory, 
\f2\i Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 
\f0\i0\b 5
\f1\b0 , 010105 (2009)}